[1] The appellant was employed as a baggage controller by a company based at Cape Town International Airport, transferring luggage containers to and from aircraft. On 18 November 1994 he was involved in a collision with a flatbed transporter inside the operational area of the airport. In consequence he sustained certain bodily injuries. He instituted an action for damages against the Road Accident Fund ('the Fund') in the Cape High Court on the basis that the collision was caused by the negligence of the driver of the flatbed transporter. The Fund, in a special plea, alleged that the appellant's claim should be dismissed as the flatbed transporter was not a motor vehicle as defined in s 1 of the Road Accident Fund Act 56 of 1996. [1]
[2] In the court a quo, the parties agreed that the issue raised in the special plea be adjudicated as a stated case in terms of Rule 33 of the Rules of the High Court. The court (HJ Erasmus J) upheld the special plea, finding that the flatbed transporter did not fall within the statutory definition of a motor vehicle. It is against that finding that the appellant appeals, with the leave of the court a quo.
[3] This appeal raises the question whether the flatbed transporter is a motor vehicle as defined in Articles 1 and 40 of the Agreement Establishing the Multilateral Motor Vehicle Accidents Fund ('the Agreement') which Agreement was entered into pursuant to the provisions of the Multilateral Motor Vehicle Accidents Fund Act 93 of 1989.
In Article 1 of the Agreement it is stated that a:
"motor vehicle" means any vehicle designed or adapted for propulsion or haulage on a road by means of fuel or electricity and includes a trailer, a caravan, an agricultural or any other implement designed or adapted to be drawn by such motor vehicle.'
This definition is substantially similar to that in the Road Accident Fund Act 56 of 1996.
Article 40 of the Agreement provides that:
'The MMF or its appointed agent, as the case may be, shall subject to the provisions of this Agreement be obliged to compensate any person whomsoever (in this Agreement called the third party) for any loss or damage which the third party has suffered as a result of-